[EXPLOSION]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[APPLAUSE]
>> I have a dream that one day
every valley shall be exalted.
>> Yeah.
>> Every hill and mountain
shall be made low.
The rough places
would be made plain
and the crooked places
will be made straight.
And the glory of the
lord shall be revealed,
and our flesh shall
see it together.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We have not even to
risk the adventure alone,
for the heroes of all
time has gone before us.
The labyrinth is
thoroughly known.
We have only to follow the
thread of the hero path.
And where we had thought
to find an abomination,
we shall find a god.
And where we had
thought to slay another,
we shall slay ourselves.
Where we had thought
to travel outward,
we should come to the
center of our own existence.
And where we had
thought to be alone,
we shall be with all the world.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Joseph Campbell on
the hero's adventure.
He was the teacher everyone
would like to have.
He was the archetype, to use
one of his favorite words.
The original, the ideal.
One of his students at Sarah
Lawrence College where Campbell
taught for almost 40
years described him
as a "beaming flashlight
into the darkness."
The director George
Lucas said of Campbell,
if it hadn't been for him,
it's possible I would still
be trying to write "Star Wars."
When I met him late in
his life, college students
across the country
had been reading
Campbell's influential book,
"The Hero with a Thousand
Faces," for years.
Scholars poured over his
four-volume study of mythology,
"The Mask of God."
Now he was working on a
monumental "Historical Atlas
of World Mythology."
Yet beyond the classroom
and lecture halls,
only a relative
handful of people
had ever seen Joseph Campbell
in person or heard him speak.
That changed with our series.
As the broadcast played out
over six consecutive weeks,
the accumulating
insight and wisdom
had an enormous,
unexpected impact.
Thousands of letters poured
into public television stations
around the country.
One that I received soon
after the first broadcast
from a woman in Kew
Gardens, New York,
summed up the
collective reaction.
She said, "I will
never be the same."
The series has been
repeated over the years,
and people continue to stop
in public to say simply,
Joseph Campbell changed my life.
I say to all of them, yes,
he was a great teacher.
But exactly how and
why he touched so many
different lives, I can't say.
But I can say this.
At a time when
millions of people
were yearning for a
way of talking about
religious experience without
regard to a rigid belief
system, Campbell gave
them the language for it.
He said myths were clues
to our spiritual nature,
and they could help guide
us to a sacred place
within where we might unlock
the creative power of our deeper
unconscious self.
And then there was
the brilliant clarity
he brought to the great and
enduring theme of mythology
across the ages, the
hero's adventure.
He tracked that
theme in the symbols,
stories, and rituals
that keep appearing
in different cultures, coming
alive in literature, art,
and religion, and today
in movies, comic books,
and yes, video games.
Campbell believed the
most heroic of all acts
is the courage to
discover who you are
and what you would like to be.
To slay the savage
dragon of the ego
and to follow your bliss
to the truth of your life.
We taped these conversations
at George Lucas' Skywalker
Ranch in California
over the last two
summers of Campbell's life.
Naturally, we began with his
favorite subject, "The Hero
with a Thousand Faces."
Why "The Hero with
a Thousand Faces?"
>> Well, because there is a
certain typical hero sequence
of actions which can be detected
in stories from all over
the world and from many,
many periods of history.
And I think it's
essentially, you might say,
the one deed done by many,
many different people.
>> Why are there so many
stories of the hero or of heroes
in mythology?
>> Well, because that's
what's worth writing about.
I mean, even in popular
novel writing, you see these.
The main character is
a hero or a heroine.
That is to say, someone who
has found or achieved or done
something beyond the
normal range of achievement
and experience.
A hero properly
is someone who has
given his life to something
bigger than himself
or other than himself.
>> So when all of
these cultures,
whatever the costume the
hero might be wearing,
what is the deed?
>> Well, there are
two types of deed.
One is the physical
deed, the hero
who has performed a war act
or a physical act of heroism.
Saving a life,
that's a hero act.
Giving himself, sacrificing
himself to another.
And the other kind
is the spiritual hero
who has learned or found a
mode of experiencing the--
[SIGH] the super-normal range
of human spiritual life and then
come back and communicated it.
It's a cycle.
It's a going and a return that
the hero cycle represents.
But then this can be seen also
in the simple initiation ritual
where a child has to give up his
childhood and become an adult.
Has to die, you might say,
to his infantile personality
and psyche and come back as
a self-responsible adult.
It's a fundamental experience
that everyone has to undergo.
We're in our childhood
for at least 14 years,
and then to get
out of that posture
of dependency,
psychological dependency
into one of psychological
self-responsibility
requires a death
and resurrection.
And that is the basic
motif of the hero journey,
leaving one condition,
finding the source of life
to bring you forth in a
richer or more mature or other
condition.
>> So that if we happen not to
be heroes in the grand sense
of redeeming society, we have
to take that journey ourselves
spiritually,
psychologically inside us.
>> That's right.
And Otto Rank in his
wonderful very short book
called "The Myth of
the Birth of the Hero,"
he says that everyone
is a hero in his birth.
He has undergone a
tremendous transformation
from a little, you might
say, water creature,
living in a realm of
the amniotic fluid
and so forth, and
then coming out,
becoming an air-breathing
mammal that ultimately will
be self-standing and so forth.
It's an enormous transformation,
and it is a heroic act.
And it's a heroic act
on the mother's part
to bring it about.
That's the primary hero,
hero form, you might say.
>> Still a journey to
be taken after that.
>> There's a big
one to be taken.
>> And that journey is not
consciously undertaken.
Do heroes go out on
their own initiative?
>> Well, there are both kinds.
A very common one that appears
in Celtic myths of someone who
has followed the lure
of a deer or animal
that he has been
following, and then
carries him into a range
of forest and landscape
that he's never been in before.
And then the animal will
undergo a transformation,
become the queen of the fairy
hills, or something like that.
That is one of not
knowing what you're doing.
You suddenly find yourself in
full career of an adventure.
There's another one
where one sets out
responsibly and intentionally
to perform the deed.
For instance, when
Ulysses's son, Telemachus,
was called by Athene,
go find your father,
that father quest
is a major hero
adventure for young people.
That is the adventure
of finding what
your career is, what your
nature is, what your source is.
He undertakes that
intentionally.
Then this one into which
you are thrown and pitched.
For instance, being
drafted into the army.
You didn't intend
it, but you're in it.
>> [YELL]
>> You're in another
transformation.
You've undergone a
death and resurrection.
You put on a uniform
of another creature.
[GUNFIRE]
>> So does the heroism
have a moral objective?
>> The moral objective is that
of saving a people or saving
a person or saving an idea.
He is sacrificing
himself for something.
That's the morality of it.
[ANGRY CHANTING]
Now you from another
position might
say that something was
something that should not
have been realized, you know?
That's a judgment
from another side.
But it doesn't destroy the
heroism of what was done.
Absolutely not.
>> Well, that's a different
angle on heroes than I got when
I was reading as a young boy the
story of Prometheus going after
the fire and bringing it
back and benefiting humanity
and suffering for it.
>> I mean, Prometheus
brings fire to mankind,
and consequently civilization.
That's, by the way,
a universal theme.
>> What is?
>> The hero-- the fire--
fire theft theme, usually
with a relay race after it.
Often, it's a blue jay or
a woodpecker or something
like this that steals the
fire and then passes it
on to something else
and something else,
one animal after another.
And they're burned by the
fire as they carry it on,
and that accounts for the
different colorings of animals
and so forth.
It's a worldwide
myth, the fire theft.
>> Do these stories of the hero
vary from culture to culture?
>> Well, it's the degree
of the illumination that--
or action that makes
them different.
There is a typical
early culture hero who
goes around slaying monsters.
Now, that is in the
period of history
when man is shaping
his world out
of a wild, savage,
unshaped world.
Well, it has another shape,
but it's not the shape for man.
He goes around killing monsters.
>> So the hero evolves over
time like most other concepts
and ideas.
>> Well, he evolves as
the culture evolves.
>> Yeah.
>> Now, Moses is a hero figure
in his ascent of the mountain,
his meeting with Yahweh on
the summit of the mountain,
and coming back with the rules
for the formation of a whole
new society.
That's the hero act.
Departure, fulfillment, return.
And on the way,
there are adventures
that can be paralleled
also in other traditions.
[TWINKLING]
Now, the Buddha figure, it's
like that of the Christ.
Of course, 500 years earlier.
You could match those two
traditions right down the line,
even to the characters of
their apostles or their monks.
Christ.
Now, there's a
perfectly good hero deed
formula represented there.
And he undergoes
three temptations.
The economic temptation
where the devil says,
you look hungry, young man.
Change the stones to bread.
Jesus said, man lives
not by bread alone,
but every word from
the mouth of God.
Next, we have the
political temptation.
He's taken to the
top of a mountain
and shown the nations
of the world and says,
you can come into control of
all these if you'll bow to me.
And then, oh,
you're so spiritual.
Let's go up to the
top of Herod's temple
and see you cast yourself down.
And God will bear you up, and
you won't even be bruised.
You're healed.
So he says, you shall not
tempt the Lord your God.
Those are the three
temptations of Christ.
In the desert, the Buddha
also goes into the forest,
has conferences with the
leading gurus of the day,
and goes past them.
Comes to the bo tree,
the tree of illumination,
undergoes three temptations.
They're not the
same temptations,
but they are three temptations.
And one is that of lust,
another is that of fear,
and another is that of social
duty, doing what you're told.
And then both of
these men come back
and they choose disciples
who help them establish
a new way of consciousness
in terms of what
they have discovered there.
These are the same hero deeds.
These are the
spiritual hero deeds.
Moses, the Buddha,
Christ, Muhammad.
Muhammad literally, and
we know this about him.
He was a camel caravan master,
but he would leave his home
and go out into a little
mountain cave that he found
and meditate and meditate
and meditate and meditate.
And one day a voice says, write.
And we have the Quran, you know?
It's an old story.
>> Sometimes it seems to me
that we ought to feel pity
for the hero instead
of admiration.
So many of them have
sacrificed their own needs.
>> They all have.
>> And very often, what
they accomplish is shattered
by the inability of
the followers to see.
>> Yeah.
You come out of the forest with
gold and it turns to ashes.
That's another
motif that occurs.
>> In this culture of easy
religion, cheaply achieved,
it seems to me we've forgotten
that all three of the great
religions teach that the
trials of the hero journey are
a significant part of it,
that there's no reward without
renunciation and
without the price.
The Quran speaks, "Do
you think that you
shall enter the garden of
bliss without such trials
as come to those who
passed before you?"
>> Well, if you realize
what the real problem is,
and that is of losing primary--
primarily thinking
about yourself
and your own self-protection.
Losing yourself, giving
yourself to another.
That's a trial in
itself, is it not?
There's a big transformation of
consciousness that's concerned.
And what all the myths
have to deal with
is transformation
of consciousness,
that you're thinking in
this way and you have now
to think in that way.
>> Well, and how is the
consciousness transformed?
>> By the trials.
>> The test that the hero--
>> Tests are certain
illuminating revelations.
Trials and revelations
are what it's all about.
>> Well, who in society today
is making any heroic myth at all
for us?
Do movies do this?
Do movies create heroes?
>> I don't know.
Now, my experience of movies--
I mean, the significant
experience I had in movies
was when I was a boy.
And they were all really movies.
They weren't talkies.
They were black
and white movies.
And I had a hero figure
who meant something to me,
and he served as a kind
of model for myself
in my physical character, and
that was Douglas Fairbanks.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I wanted to be a synthesis of
Douglas Fairbanks and Leonardo
da Vinci.
That was my idea.
But those were models,
were roles that came to me.
[MUSIC - "STAR
WARS (MAIN THEME)"]
>> Does a movie like "Star
Wars" fill some of that need
for the spiritual
adventure, for the hero?
>> Oh, it's perfect.
It does the cycle perfectly.
It's not simple morality play.
It has to do with the powers
of life and their inflection
through the action of man.
One of the wonderful things
I think about this adventure
into space is that the narrator,
the artist, the one thinking up
the story is in a
field that is not
covered by our own
knowledges, you know?
There was-- much
of the adventure
in the old stories is
where they go into regions
that no one's been in before.
Well, we've now
conquered the planet,
so there are no empty
spaces for the imagination
to go forth and fight
its own war, you know?
With their powers.
And that was the
first thing I felt,
that there's a whole new
realm for the imagination
to open out and live its forms.
>> Do you, when you look at
something like "Star Wars,"
recognize some of the themes of
the hero throughout mythology?
>> Well, I think that George
Lucas was using standard
mythological figures.
[CLANGING]
The old man as the advisor.
Well, specifically,
what he made me think of
is the Japanese swordmaster.
>> Remember, a Jedi can feel
the force flowing through him.
>> I've known some
of those people,
and this man has
their character.
>> Well, there's something
mythological too, isn't there,
in the sense that the hero is
helped by this stranger who
shows up and gives him
some instrument, a sword,
or a sheaf of light,
shaft of light?
>> Yeah, but he gives him not
only a physical instrument,
but a psychological commitment
and a psychological center.
>> This time, let go your
conscious self and act
on instinct.
>> When he had him exercising
with that strange weapon
and then pulled the mask over,
that's real Japanese stuff.
[BUZZING]
[WHOOSHING]
>> I'll hit him myself.
>> When I took our
two sons to see it,
they did the same thing the
audience did at that moment
when the voice of Ben Kenobi
says to Luke Skywalker
in the climactic moment--
>> Use the force, Luke.
[DRAMATIC MUSIC]
Let go, Luke.
>> The audience broke out into--
>> They did.
>> --elation and to applause.
>> Well, you see, this
thing communicates.
It is in a language that is
talking to young people today,
and that's marvelous.
[EXPLOSION]
>> So the hero
goes for something.
He doesn't just go
along for the ride.
He's not a mere adventurer.
>> Well, a serendipitous
adventure can take place also.
You know where the word
serendipity comes from?
It comes from the
Sanskrit, [NON-ENGLISH],,
the isle of silk,
which was a former--
formerly name of Ceylon.
And it's a story about a family
that's just randomly on its way
to Ceylon, and all these
adventures take place.
So you can have the
serendipitous adventure
as well.
>> Is the adventurer who takes
that kind of a trip a hero
in the mythological--
>> He is ready for it.
This is a very
interesting thing about
these mythological themes.
The achievement of the hero
is one that he is ready for,
and it's really a
manifestation of his character.
And it's amusing
the way in which
the landscape and the
conditions of the environment
match the readiness of the hero.
The adventure that he's ready
for is the one that he gets.
>> Look, I ain't in this
for your revolution,
and I'm not in it
for you, princess.
I expect to be well paid.
>> The mercenary solo begins
as a mercenary and ends up
as a hero.
>> He was a very practical guy,
a materialist in his character,
at least as he
thought of himself.
But he was a compassionate
human being at the same time
and didn't know it.
The adventure evoked a
quality of his character
that he hadn't
known he possessed.
>> I love you.
>> I know.
>> He thinks he's an egoist.
He really isn't.
And that's a very lovable
kind of human being,
I think, and there are lots of
them functioning beautifully
in the world.
They think they're
working for themselves.
Very practical and
all, but no, there's
something else pushing them.
[LIGHTHEARTED MUSIC]
[SQUEAK]
>> What did you think
about the scene in the bar?
That's my favorite,
not only in this piece,
but of many, many
pieces I've ever seen.
>> Why?
>> Well, where you
are is on the edge.
You're about to embark
into the outlying spaces.
And--
>> A real adventure.
This is the jumping off place.
And there is where you meet
people who've been out there,
and they run the machines
that go out there,
and you haven't been there.
It reminds me a little bit
in Robert Louis Stevenson's
"Treasure Island," the
atmosphere before you start off
the adventure.
You're in the
seaport and there is
old salt, sea men
who've been on the sea,
and that's their world.
And these are the
space people also.
>> I got a bad
feeling about this.
[GROWLING]
[CLUNK]
>> The walls are moving!
>> Don't just stand there!
Try and brace it with something!
>> My favorite scene was
when they were in the garbage
compactor and the
walls were closing in.
And I thought, that's like
the belly of the whale that--
>> That's what it is.
Yeah.
That's where they were.
They're down in the
belly of the whale.
>> What's the mythological
significance of the belly?
>> It's the descent
into the dark.
Jonah in the whale.
I mean, that's a standard motif
of going into the whale's belly
and coming out again.
>> Why must the hero do that?
>> The whale represents the
personification, you might say,
of all that is in
the unconscious.
In reading these
things psychologically,
water is the unconscious.
The creature in the water
would be the dynamism
of the unconscious, which
is dangerous and powerful
and has to be controlled
by consciousness.
The first stage in the hero
adventure when he starts off
on an adventure is
leaving the realm
of light, which he
controls and knows about,
and moving toward the threshold.
And it's at the threshold
that the monster of the abyss
comes to meet him.
And then there are
two or three results.
One, the hero is cut
to pieces and descends
into the abyss in fragments
to be resurrected,
or he may kill the dragon
power, as Siegfried
does when he kills the dragon.
But then he tastes
the dragon blood.
That's-- he has to
assimilate that power.
And when Siegfried
has killed the dragon
and tasted the blood, he
hears the song of nature.
He has transcended his
humanity, you know?
And re-associated
himself with the powers
of nature, which are
the powers of our life
from which our mind removes us.
You see, this thing up
here, this consciousness
thinks it's running the shop.
It's a secondary organ.
It's a secondary organ
of a total human being.
And it must not put
itself in control.
It must submit and serve
the humanity of the body.
>> Join me, and I will
complete your training.
>> When it does put itself in
control, you get this father,
the man who's gone over
to the intellectual side.
>> I'll never join you!
>> If you only knew the
power of the dark side.
>> He isn't thinking or
living in terms of humanity.
He's living in
terms of a system.
And this is the
threat to our lives.
We all face it.
We all operate in our society
in relation to a system.
Now, is the system going to
eat you up and relieve you
of your humanity?
Or are you going
to be able to use
the system to human purposes?
>> Would "The Hero
with a Thousand Faces"
help us to answer that question
about how to change the system
so that we are not serving it?
>> I don't think it would
help you to change the system,
but it would help you to live
in the system as a human being.
>> By doing what?
>> Well, like Luke Skywalker,
not going over but resisting.
It's impersonal claims.
>> But I can hear someone out
there in the audience saying,
well, that's all well and good
for the imagination of a George
Lucas or for the scholarship
of a Joseph Campbell,
but that isn't what
happens in my life.
>> You bet it does.
If the person doesn't
listen to the demands
of his own spiritual
and heart life
and insists on a
certain program,
you're going to have a
schizophrenic crack-up.
The person has put
himself off center.
He has aligned himself
with a programmatic life,
and it's not the one the
body's interested in at all.
And the world's full of
people who have stopped
listening to themselves.
In my own life, I've
had many opportunities
to commit myself to a
system and to go with it
and to obey its requirements.
My life has been
that of a maverick.
I would not submit.
>> You really believe that the
creative spirit ranges on its
own out there beyond boundaries.
>> Yeah, I do.
>> Something of the hero.
And I don't mean to suggest that
you see yourself as a hero--
>> No, I don't, but I
see myself as a maverick.
[LAUGHS]
>> So perhaps the hero lurks
in each one of us when we
don't know it.
>> Well, yes.
I mean, our life
evokes our character
and you find out more about
yourself as you go on.
And it's very nice to
be able to put yourself
in situations that will evoke
your higher nature rather
than your lower.
>> Give me an example.
>> I can give you a story.
I'm dealing with an
Iroquois story right now.
And there's a motif that comes
in American Indian stories very
often, what I call the
refusal of suitors.
[FLUTE MUSIC]
A girl with her mother
lived in a wigwam
on the edge of the village.
She was a very handsome
girl, but extremely proud
and would not accept
any of the boys.
They proposed to her
through the mother.
And the mother was
terribly annoyed with her.
Well, one day, they're
out collecting wood,
and they have gone a long
way from the village.
And while they are
collecting the wood,
a terrific darkness
comes over them.
Now, this wasn't the
darkness of night descending.
When you have a
darkness like that,
there's some magician
at work somewhere.
So the mother says, well,
let's gather some bark
and make a little wigwam, a
bark wigwam for ourselves,
and collect wood for
a fire, and we'll just
spend the night here.
So they do that, and
the mother falls asleep.
And the girl looks, and there's
this magnificent guy standing
there with a wampum sash,
glorious feathers and all
this kind-- black feathers.
He says, I've come to marry
you and I'll await your reply.
She accepts the guy and
the mother accepts the man,
and he gives the
mother the wampum belt
to prove that he's
serious about all this.
So he goes away with the girl.
She has acquiesced.
Mere human beings weren't
good enough for her,
but here's something
that really--
[WHOOSH]
So she's in another domain.
Now, the adventure is marvelous.
She goes with him to his village
and they enter his lodge.
The people in there greet
her, and she feels very
comfortable about it and all.
And then the next day he
says, I'm going off to hunt.
So he leaves the lodge and the
door is closed with a flap.
There's a flap.
When he closes the flap,
she hears a strange sound.
So there's the whole day.
And she's just in the hut.
And as evening comes, she
hears that strange sound again.
And the door flap is
flung off, and in comes
this prodigious serpent
with his tongue darting.
And he puts his head
in her lap and says,
now, you must search my head
for lice and things like that.
And she finds all kinds
of horrible things there,
kills them all.
And then he withdraws, and
in a moment after the gate--
door has been closed, it
opens again and in he comes--
it's the same beautiful
young man again.
And said, were you afraid of
me when I came in just now?
She says she wasn't
at all afraid.
Next day, he goes off to hunt.
And then she leaves the
lodge to gather wood,
and the first thing she
sees is an enormous serpent
basking on the rocks, and then
another, and then another.
And she begins to feel
very badly, very homesick
and discouraged.
Then the evening, the serpent,
and then the man again.
The third day when
he leaves, she
decides she's going to try
to get out of this place.
So she goes out and she's
standing in the woods,
thinking.
And a voice speaks to her,
and she turns, and there's
a little old man there.
And he says, darling,
you are in trouble.
The man that you've married
is one of seven brothers.
They are great magicians.
And like many
people of this kind,
their hearts are
not in their bodies.
There's a collection
of seven hearts
in a bag that is hidden under
the bed of the eldest to whom
you are married.
You must go get
that, and then we'll
deal with the next
part of the adventure.
She goes in, finds the bag of
hearts, and is running out.
And a voice calls
after her, stop, stop.
It's the voice of the magician.
And she continues to run.
He says, you may think
you can get away from me,
but you never can.
And just at that point, she
hears the voice of the old man.
He says, I'll help you, dear.
And he's pulling her
out of the water.
She didn't even know
that she was in water.
>> What does that say to you?
>> That's to say you have
moved out of the heart land,
the solid Earth, and in the
field of the unconscious.
And she had pulled herself
into the transcendent realm
and got caught in the
negative powers of the abyss,
and she's being rescued
down by the upper powers.
What you have done has been
to elevate yourself out
of the local field
and put yourself
in the field of higher
power, higher danger.
And are you going to
be able to handle it?
If you are not eligible for
this place into which you
put yourself, it's going
to be a demon marriage.
It's going to be a real mess.
If you are eligible,
it can be a glory
that will give you a life
that is yours in your own way.
>> So these stories of mythology
are simply trying to express
a truth that can't be
grasped any other way.
>> It's the edge, the interface
between what can be known
and what is never to be
discovered because it is
a mystery transcendent
of all human research,
the source of life.
What is it?
No one knows.
>> Why are stories important
for getting at that?
>> Well, I think it's important
to live life with a knowledge
of its mystery and
of your own mystery.
And it gives life a new zest,
a new balance, a new harmony
to do this.
Therapy and
psychological therapy,
when people find out what it
is that's ticking in them,
they get straightened out.
And what is it that life is?
I find thinking in
mythological terms
is how people are visibly.
You can see it happen.
>> How?
What does it do?
>> It erases anxieties.
It puts them in accord with
the inevitables of their life.
And they can see the
positive values of what--
or the negative aspects
of what is positive.
It's whether you're going to
say no to the serpent or yes
to the serpent.
As easy as that.
>> No to the adventure?
>> Yeah.
The adventure of being
alive, of living.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> When I was growing
up, tales of King Arthur,
tales of the medieval knights,
tales of the dragon slayers
were very strong in my world.
>> Dragons represent
greed, really.
The European dragon guards
things in this cave,
and what he guards are
heaps of gold and virgins.
And he can't make use of either
of them, but he just guards.
There's no vitality
of experience
either of the value of the
gold or of the female whom
he's guarding there.
Psychologically, the
dragon is one's own finding
of one's self to one's
ego, and you're captured
in your own dragon cage.
And the parameter
of the psychiatrist
is to break that
dragon, open him
up so that you can have a
larger field of relationships.
Hume had a patient come
to him who felt alone,
and she drew a picture of
herself as caught in the rocks.
From the waist down,
she was bound in rocks.
And this was on a windy
shore, and the wind blowing
and her hair blowing.
And all the gold which is the
sign of the vitality of life
was locked in the rocks.
And the next picture
that he had her draw
had followed something
he had said to her.
Suddenly, a lightning flash
hit the rocks and the gold
came pouring out.
And then she found reflected
on rocks round about the gold.
And there was no more
gold in the rocks.
It was all available on the top.
And in the conferences that
followed, those patches of gold
were identified.
They were her friends.
She wasn't alone.
But she had locked herself in
her own little room and life,
but she had friends.
Do you see what I mean?
This is killing the dragon.
And you have fears and things.
This is the dragon.
That's exactly what
that's all about, at least
the European dragon.
Chinese dragon is different.
>> What is it?
>> It represents the
vitality of the swamps.
And the dragon comes out,
beating his belly and saying,
ha ha, ha, ha.
You know?
That's another kind of dragon.
And he's the one that yields
the bounty and the waters
and all that kind of thing.
He's the great, glorious thing.
But this is the negative
one that cuts it out.
>> So what you're saying is
if there are not dragons out
there, then there may not be--
>> The real dragon is in you.
>> And what is that real dragon?
>> That's your ego,
holding you in.
>> What's my ego?
>> What I want, what I
believe, what I can do,
what I think I
love, and all that.
What I regard as the aim
of my life, and so forth.
It might be too small.
It might be that
which pins you down.
And if it's simply
that of doing what
the environment tells
you to do, it certainly
is pinning you down.
And so the environment
is your dragon
as it reflects within yourself.
>> How do I slay?
>> How do you--
>> Slay that dragon in me?
What's the journey
I have to make?
You have to make?
Each of us has to make?
You talk about something called
the soul's high adventure.
>> My general formula for my
students is follow your bliss.
I mean, find where it is and
don't be afraid to follow it.
>> Can my bliss be my life's
love or my life's work?
Is it my work or my life?
>> Well, if the work that you're
doing is the work that you
chose to do because you
are enjoying it, that's it.
But if you think oh, gee, I
couldn't do that, you know,
that's your dragon
locking you in.
Oh, no.
I couldn't be a writer.
I couldn't do what
so-and-so is doing.
>> Unlike the classical heroes,
we're not going on our journey
to save the world,
but to save ourselves.
>> And in doing that,
you save the world.
I mean, you do.
The influence of a
vital person vitalizes.
There's no doubt about it.
The world is a wasteland.
People have the notion of saving
the world by shifting it around
and changing the
rules, and so forth.
And no.
Any world is a living
world if it's alive.
And the thing is to
bring it to life.
And the way to bring it to life
is to find in your own case
where your life is and be
alive yourself, it seems to me.
>> That's the power of
the teacher, isn't it?
To bring vitality to
others, to make others
see the vitality in them.
>> Well, it happens.
That's one of the
delights of teaching.
I mean, when you're not teaching
in order to have an easy job,
but because you really
have something to teach,
and you love young
people, and you
want to give what you've got--
found to them.
And to see them come alive
is the reward of teaching.
>> But you say I have to take
that journey and go down there
and slay those dragons.
Do I have to go alone?
>> If you have someone who
can help you, that's fine too.
But ultimately, the last
trick has to be done by you.
>> In all of these
journeys of mythology,
there's a place
everyone wishes to find.
What is it?
The Buddhists talk of nirvana.
Jesus talks of peace.
There's a place of
rest and repose.
Is that typical of
the hero's journey,
that there's a place to find?
>> That's a place
in yourself of rest.
Now this, I know a little
bit about from athletics.
The athlete who is
in championship form
has a quiet place in
himself, and it's out of that
that his action comes.
If he's all in the action field,
he's not performing properly.
There's a center out
of which you act.
And Jean, my wife,
a dancer, tells me
that in dance this is true too.
There's the center that
has to be known and held.
There it's quite physically
recognized by the person.
But unless this center has
been found, you're torn apart.
Tension comes.
Now, the Buddha's
word is nirvana.
Nirvana is a psychological
state of mind.
It's not a place like heaven.
It's not something
that's not here.
It is here in the middle
of the turmoil, what's
called samsara, the
whirlpool of life conditions.
That nirvana is what?
It is the condition that
comes when you are not
compelled by desire or by
fear or by social commitments.
When you hold your center
and act out of there.
>> And like all heroes,
the Buddha doesn't show you
the truth, the illumination.
He shows you the way to--
>> The way.
But it's got to be your way too.
I mean, how should
I get rid of fear?
The Buddha can't tell me
how I'm going to do it.
There are exercises that
different teachers will
give you, but they
may not work for you.
And all the teacher
can do is give you
a clue of the direction.
He's like a lighthouse that
says, there are rocks over here
and steer clear.
>> You talk a lot
about consciousness.
>> Yes.
>> Most people hear that term
and like me have only a veiled
understanding of it.
What is it?
>> Jean and I are
living in Hawaii,
and we're living
right by the ocean.
And we have a little
lanai, a little porch.
And there's a coconut tree
that grows up through the porch
and it goes on up.
And there's a kind of vine
plant, a big powerful thing
with leaves like this that
has grown up the coconut tree.
Now, that plant sends forth
little feelers to go out
and clutch the plant.
And it knows where the
plant is and what to do
and where the tree is.
And it grows up like
this, and it opens a leaf.
And that leaf immediately
turns to where the sun is.
Now, you can't tell me
that leaf doesn't know
where the sun is going to be.
All of the leaves
go just like that,
what's called
heliotropism, turning
toward where the sun is.
That's a form of consciousness.
There is a plant consciousness.
There is an animal
consciousness.
We share all of these things.
You eat certain
foods and the bile
knows whether there's something
there for it to go to work on.
I mean, this whole
thing is consciousness.
I begin to feel more and
more that the whole world is
conscious.
Certainly, the vegetable
world is conscious.
And when you live in the
woods as I did as a kid,
you can see all these
different consciousnesses
relating to themselves.
Now, it is a part of the
sort of Cartesian mode
to think of consciousness
as being something
peculiar to the head, that
this is the organ originating
consciousness.
It isn't.
It's an organ that
inflects consciousness
to a certain direction, a
certain set of purposes.
But there's a whole
consciousness here in the body,
and the whole living world
is informed by consciousness.
I have a feeling that
consciousness and energy
are the same thing somehow.
Where you really see energy,
there is consciousness.
>> Scientists are beginning
to talk quite openly about
the Gaia principle.
>> You want the whole
planet as an organism.
>> Mother Earth.
>> And you see, if you will
think of ourselves as coming
out of the Earth rather than
as being thrown in here from
somewhere else, you know,
thrown out of the Earth,
we are the Earth.
We are the consciousness
of the Earth.
These are the eyes
of the Earth and this
is the voice of the Earth.
What else?
>> How do we raise
our consciousness?
>> Well, that's a matter of
what you are supposed to think
about.
And that's what
meditations are for.
And all of life is a meditation,
most of it unintentional.
A lot of people spend
most of it in meditating
on where their
money's coming from
and where it's going to go, but
that's a level of meditation.
Or if you have a
family to bring up,
your concern for the family.
These are all perfectly--
very important
concerns, but they
have to do with physical
conditions mostly
and spiritual conditions
of the children, of course.
But how are you
going to communicate
spiritual consciousness
to the children
if you don't have it yourself?
So how do you get that?
Then you think about the myths.
What the myths are
for is to bring us
into a level of consciousness
that is spiritual.
Just for example, I walk off
52nd Street and Fifth Avenue
into St. Patrick's Cathedral.
I've left a very busy
city, and one of the most
fiercely economically
inspired cities on the planet.
I walk into that cathedral,
and everything around me
speaks of spiritual mystery.
The mystery of the cross.
What's that all about there?
The stained glass windows which
bring another atmosphere in.
My consciousness has been
brought up onto another level
altogether, and I am on
a different platform.
And then I walk out
and [TONGUE CLICK]
I'm back in this one again.
Now, can I hold
something from that?
Well, certain prayers
or meditations that
are associated with the
whole context there,
these are what
are called mantras
in India, little
meditation themes that
hold your consciousness
on that level
instead of letting it drop
down here all the way.
And then what you
can finally do is
recognize that this is
simply a lower level of that.
[CHURCH BELLS]
>> The cathedral at Chartres
which you love so much also
expresses a relationship
of the human to the cosmos,
doesn't it?
>> Well, I think everyone who
has spent any time at Chartres
has felt something very
special about this cathedral.
I've been there
about eight times.
When I was a student
in Paris, I went down
there about five times and
spent one whole weekend
and identified and looked
at every single figure
in that cathedral.
[CHOIR SINGING]
I was there so much that
the concierge, this little
old fellow who took
care of the cathedral,
he came to me one
noon time and he said,
would you like to go up
with me and ring the bells?
I said, I sure would.
So we climbed the
flitch, the tower up
to where the great bell was,
the great enormous bronze bell.
And there was a little--
like a seesaw.
And he stood on one
end of the seesaw
and I stood on the
other end of the seesaw,
and there was a little bar
there for us to hold on to.
He gave the thing a push,
and then he was on it
and I was on it.
We started going up
and down, and the wind
blowing through our hair
up there in the cathedral.
And then it began underneath.
Bong!
You know?
Bong, bong.
I tell you, it was one
of the most thrilling
adventures of my life.
And when it was all
over, he brought me down.
He said, I want to show
you where my room is.
Well, in a cathedral, you
have the nave and then
the transept and then the apse.
And around the apse
is the choir screen.
Now, the choir screen in
Chartres is about that wide.
And he took me in a little door
into the middle of the choir
screen, and there was his
little bed and a little table
with a lamp on it.
And when I looked out, there was
the Black Madonna, the vitrine,
the window of the Black Madonna,
and that was where he lived.
Now, there was a man
living in a meditation,
a constant meditation.
I mean, that was a very
moving, beautiful thing.
Well, I've been there
time and time again since.
>> What do you find
when you go there?
What does it say about all
that we've been discussing?
>> Well, the first thing it says
is it takes me back to a time
when these principles
informed the society.
I mean, you can tell
what's in foreign society
by the size of--
what the building is that's the
tallest building in the place.
When you approach
a medieval town,
the cathedral's the
tallest thing in the place.
When you approach a
17th century city,
it's the political palace that's
the tallest thing in the place.
And when you approach
a modern city,
it's office buildings
and dwellings
that are the tallest
things in the place.
And if you go to Salt
Lake City, you'll
see the whole thing illustrated
right in front of your face.
First, the temple
was built. The temple
was built right in the
center of the city.
Yeah, I mean, this was
the proper organization.
That's the spiritual
center from which
all flows in all directions.
And then the capitol was
built right beside the temple,
and it's bigger than the temple.
And now the biggest thing
is the office building
that takes care of the
affairs of both the temple
and the political building.
That's the history of
Western civilization
from the Gothic through
the princely periods
of the 16th, 17th,
18th centuries
to this economic world
that we're in now.
>> In New York now, the
debate is over who can build
the tallest building.
Not to praise, but to
build the tallest building.
>> Yeah.
And they are magnificent.
I mean, some of the things that
are going up in New York now
really are.
And this is a kind of
architectural triumph.
And what it is is the
statement of the city.
We are a financial power
center, and look what we can do.
It's the kind of
virtuosic acrobatic stunt.
>> Will new myths
come from there?
>> Well, that's something might.
You can't predict
what a myth is going
to be any more than
you can predict what
you're going to dream tonight.
Myths and dreams come
from the same place.
They come from realizations
of some kind that
have then to find
expression in symbolic form.
And the myth-- the only myth
that's going to be worth
thinking about in
the immediate future
is one that's talking
about the planet.
Not the city, not these people,
but the planet and everybody
on it.
That's my main thought for what
the future myth is going to be.
And what it will have
to deal with will
be exactly what all myths have
deal with-- have dealt with.
The maturation of the
individual, the gradual--
the pedagogical way to
follow from dependency
through adulthood to maturity,
and then to the exit,
and how to do it.
And then how to relate
to this society,
and how to relate this
society to the world of nature
and the cosmos.
That's what the myths
have all talked about.
That's what this one's
got to talk about.
But the society that
it's going to talk about
is the society of the planet.
And until that gets going,
you don't have anything.
>> There's that wonderful
photograph you have
of the Earth seen from space.
And it's very small, and at
the same time it's very grand.
>> You don't see any divisions
there of nations or states
or anything of the kind.
This might be the
symbol, really,
for the new mythology to come.
That is the country that we
are going to be celebrating,
and those are the people
that we are one with.
[MUSIC PLAYING]